{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2822
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww29200\viewh17840\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 We're going to head straight to the Vatican. My colleague Mariam Masheri is standing by. Marian Lewis, thank you very much indeed. Yes, welcome to the Vatican where Pope Leo I 14th has been celebrating mass with cardinals at the Systeine Chapel following his election on Thursday. [Music] These are the recent pictures of the new pope entering the cysteine chapel leading his first mass as pontiff. He began his homaly in English saying he knew he could rely on every cardinal to walk with him on his new mission. The pope has said the church must do more work in places where there is a lack of faith and said that he hopes his election can help the Catholic Church bring light to the dark nights of this world. Well, Pope Leo will be the 267th occupant of the throne of St. Peter. So, what do we know about the first American to fill the role of Pope? While 69year-old Pope Leo the 14th was born Robert Francis Provostst in Chicago to parents of Spanish and Franco Italian descent. He was ordained in 1982 and moved to Peru 3 years later. He then became a naturalized Peruvian citizen, spending 10 years as a local parish pastor and teaching at a seminary in northwestern Peru. He became well known to cardinals in the Vatican because of his high-profile role as prefect of the dicestry for bishops. Pope Francis made him the bishop of Chico in Peru in 2014 and then he became Archbishop in January 2023. Within a few months, Pope Francis had made him a cardinal. Well, joining me here is Anna Roland, professor of Catholic social thought and practice at Durham University, who's been on succumb to the Vatican for two years. And I have to say, you met the new pope last night. What was that like? I did, which was a surprise and an accident, I have to say. How was it an accident? How does one meet the pope accidentally? Well, my my colleague, who's a very senior woman in the Vatican, one of the most senior women in the Vatican to be appointed by Pope Francis, was charging at high speed across St. Peter's Square. And I bumped into her and she said to me, "Run." Um, and I said, "Why?" And she said, "Just run." So, at that point, I realized I was following her back to the Palazzo that's just behind where we're talking now. And that's where she lives in one of the apartments and where the former Cardinal Prevost lived as well. So, rather sweetly, just as Pope Francis had gone back to pay his bill at the guest house just after he became pope, Pope Leo the 14th, went back to the community in the Palazzo where he lives to greet people personally, to give them a blessing, and to spend a little time to spend a little time talking. That's Natalie. That's sister Natalie as well. There you are speaking to him. And what did he say to you? So, well, I had a chance to to congratulate him and also to assure him of prayers, but also to thank him in particular for the powerful words that he spoke from the balcony and to express the gratitude on behalf of the crowd. So many of that crowd would have loved to have had the chance I had last night to greet him personally. So, I felt responsible to bring him the gratitude and the joy of that crowd. What were the powerful words that stuck out for you from last night? So, peace. Nine times he mentioned the word peace and he wants to be a peaceuilder, a bridgeuer. He said both for the church where there are divisions in the church but also for the world. The second key message was love, the completely uh unconditional love of God for all people. And he talked about bringing peace and love for the whole of humanity but also for the the whole earth. So that message very much from Benedict and Francis that's focused on our climactic situation as well as our kind of human situation of brokenness. So I think he wants to focus on peace building um on a kind of unifying project overcoming polarization and to be basically a pope of a just peace for our times powerful. Will he succeed given the geopolitical headwinds given the way in which the Catholic Church has been moving over the last few years? Yes, I think that there's a very good chance he will. He came out dressed like Benedict speaking like Francis. That was the first sign of I think his unifying mission to thread together literally in the threads he was wearing to thread together these papacies. And I think that for the church is very significant as a sign for the world also an important sign. His first visit as I understand it outside the Vatican will be to the Regina Chi prison just down the road from here. Oh, interesting. Yeah. He's an Augustinian. So he brings that focus on intellectual life but also service of the poorest and the most marginalized. That is a heady literally combination and I think very interesting to have an Augustinian pope for a moment when as we saw the other month JD Vance quoting St. Augustine on Christian nationalism. What will an Augustinian pope say to an Augustinian moment? Well, what indeed Anna it's pleasure to talk to you. Thank you very much for showing your photos as well of you and Pope Leo I 14th. Uh now let me just if I may show viewers at home some of the Italian newspapers from this morning and unsurprisingly all of them showing uh the new pope on the front page. This is Iljal Leon Dame the lion of America a play on the pope's name. La pache siaonte I don't know if you can see that from the aan uh publication peace be with us. Sorry. Conoi laoi. Peace be with us. And here we have Lasa Papa de Duandi, the pope of two worlds. And I think a reference there to the fact that uh Pope Leo is uh American born, North American born, but also a naturalized Peruvian citizen. So uh also has strong connections with Latin America. And finally, Lar Publica Papa Americano, the American Pope. Absolutely brilliant front pages there. All of them showing Pope Leo the 14th on that balcony. Well, Louie Provost is the brother of Pope Leon. He spoken about the moment he found out his sibling was the new head of the Roman Catholic Church. Have a listen. It was like, "Oh my god, it's Rob. It's never going to be the same. What are we going to do?" Oh, yes. It's Rob. Yay. Yay. I used to I still do it. You know, play with guns, knives, bows and arrows. He would play priest. How boring. Come on, Rob. Let's go. No. Can I give you communion? And we just tease. You know, you're going to be the pope. You want to be the pope. Here we are today. He knew from an early stage he wanted to be a priest. And he did. got out of grammar school, went right to the seminary. He was always like a servant to the people, trying to help the people, build churches down there and schools. He's more down the middle. Okay, let's see how we can take what Francis did, massage it a little bit as Pope now. He's just reinforcing the fact that God and Jesus said, "Follow me." and you'll be saved. Evil will not win. That's the brother of Pope Leo I 14th. And uh the mood, the atmosphere here in the Vatican is one of such hope. I spoke to a few people as I was walking into work this morning and they asked me if I was a journalist. I said, "Yes, I am." And they said, "Are you happy about Pope Leo?" And I said, "Yes, are you?" And they all unanimously said to me, "Yes, we are so happy. We're so excited. That really is the feeling that one gets from walking around within St. Peter's Basilica uh and the area around the Vatican. There is such a feeling of hope, of renewal, of a look towards the future for the Roman Catholic }