We're going to head straight to the Vatican.
My colleague Marion Machiri is standing by, Marion.
Lewis, thank you very much indeed.
Yes, welcome to the Vatican,
where Pope Leo XIV has been celebrating mass
with cardinals at the Sistine Chapel
following his election on Thursday.
These are the recent pictures of the new pope
entering the Sistine Chapel leading his first mass as pontiff.
He began his homily in English,
saying he knew he could rely on every cardinal
to walk with him on his new mission.
The pope has said the church must do more work
in places where there is a lack of faith
and said that he hopes his election
can help the Catholic Church
bring light to the dark nights of this world.
Well, Pope Leo will be the 267th occupant
of the throne of Saint Peter.
So what do we know about the first American
to fill the role of pope?
Well, 69-year-old Pope Leo XIV
was born Robert Francis Prevost in Chicago
to parents of Spanish and Franco-Italian descent.
He was ordained in 1982
and moved to Peru three years later.
He then became a naturalised Peruvian citizen
spending 10 years as a local parish pastor
and teaching at a seminary in northwestern Peru.
He became well-known to cardinals in the Vatican
because of his high-profile role
as prefect of the Dicastery for bishops.
Pope Francis made him the bishop of Checleo in Peru in 2014
and then he became archbishop in January 2023.
Within a few months, Pope Francis had made him a cardinal.
Well, joining me here is Anna Rowlands,
professor of Catholic social thought and practice
at Durham University,
who's been on succumbment to the Vatican for two years.
And I have to say, you met the new pope last night.
What was that like?
I did, which was a surprise and an accident.
How was it an accident?
How does one meet the pope accidentally?
Well, my colleague, who's a very senior woman in the Vatican,
one of the most senior women in the Vatican
to be appointed by Pope Francis,
was charging at high speed across St Peter's Square
and I bumped into her and she said to me, run.
And I said, why?
And she said, just run.
So at that point I realised I was following her back
to the palazzo that's just behind where we're talking now
and that's where she lives in one of the apartments
and where the former Cardinal Prevost lived as well.
So rather sweetly, just as Pope Francis had gone back
to pay his bill at the guest house just after he became pope,
Pope Leo XIV went back to the community
in the palazzo where he lives to greet people personally,
to give them a blessing and to spend a little time,
to spend a little time talking.
There you are.
That's sister Natalie as well.
There you are speaking to him.
And what did he say to you?
So, well, I had a chance to congratulate him
and also to assure him of prayers,
but also to thank him in particular for the powerful words
that he spoke from the balcony
and to express the gratitude on behalf of the crowd.
So many of that crowd would have loved
to have had the chance that I had last night
to greet him personally.
So I felt responsible to bring him the gratitude
and the joy of that crowd.
What were the powerful words
that stuck out for you from last night?
So peace, nine times he mentioned the word peace
and he wants to be a peace builder, a bridge builder,
he said, both for the church,
whether a divisions in the church, but also for the world.
The second key message was love,
the completely unconditional love of God for all people.
And he talked about bringing peace and love
for the whole of humanity, but also for the whole earth.
So that message very much from Benedict and Francis
that's focused on our climactic situation
as well as our kind of human situation of brokenness.
So I think he wants to focus on peace building
on a kind of unifying project, overcoming polarization
and to be basically a pope of a just peace for our times.
Will he succeed given the geopolitical headwinds,
given the way in which the Catholic church
has been moving over the last few years?
Yes, I think that there's a very good chance he will.
He came out dressed like Benedict, speaking like Francis.
That was the first sign of, I think,
his unifying mission to thread together,
literally in the threads he was wearing,
to thread together these papacies.
And I think that for the church
is very significant as a sign for the world,
also an important sign.
His first visit, as I understand it,
outside the Vatican will be to the Regina Chaly prison
just down the road from here.
Interesting.
Yeah, he's an Augustinian,
so he brings that focus on intellectual life,
but also service of the poorest and the most marginalized.
That is a heady, literally, combination.
And I think very interesting to have an Augustinian pope
for a moment when, as we saw the other month,
JD Vance quoting St. Augustine on Christian nationalism.
What will an Augustinian pope say to an Augustinian moment?
Well, what indeed.
Anna, it's a pleasure to talk to you.
Thank you very much for sharing your photos as well.
Not at all.
You and Pope Leo XIV.
Now, let me just, if I may, show viewers at home
some of the Italian newspapers from this morning.
And unsurprisingly, all of them showing
the new pope on the front page.
This is Il Giornale, Leone d'America,
The Lion of America, a play on the pope's name.
La pace sia con te.
I don't know if you can see that
from the Avenida publication.
Peace be with us.
Sorry, con noi.
La pace sia con noi.
Peace be with us.
And here we have La Stampa.
Il Papa dei Due Mondi.
The pope of two worlds.
And I think a reference there to the fact
that Pope Leo is American-born, North American-born,
but also a naturalized Peruvian citizen.
So also has strong connections with Latin America.
And finally, La Repubblica.
Il Papa Americano, the American pope.
Absolutely brilliant front pages there.
All of them showing Pope Leo XIV on that balcony.
Well, Louis Prevost is the brother of Pope Leo.
He's spoken about the moment he found out
his sibling was the new head of the Roman Catholic Church.
Have a listen.
It was like, oh my God, it's Rob.
It's never gonna be the same.
What are we gonna do?
Yes, it's Rob, yeah, yeah.
I used to, I still do it, you know?
Play with guns, knives, bolts and arrows.
He would play priest.
How boring, come on, Rob, let's go.
No, can I give you communion?
And we'd just teach him, you're gonna be the pope.
You wanna be the pope.
Here we are today.
He knew from an early stage he wanted to be a priest.
And he did.
Got out of grammar school, went right to the seminary.
He was always like a servant to the people,
trying to help the people build churches down there
and schools.
He's more down the middle.
Okay, let's see how we can take what Francis did,
massage it a little bit.
As pope now, he's just reinforcing the fact
that God and Jesus said, follow me and you'll be saved.
You'll be saved, evil will not win.
That's the brother of Pope Leo XIV.
And the mood, the atmosphere here in the Vatican
is one of such hope.
I spoke to a few people as I was walking into work
this morning and they asked me if I was a journalist.
I said, yes, I am.
And they said, are you happy about Pope Leo?
And I said, yes, are you?
And they all unanimously said to me, yes, we are so happy.
We're so excited.
And that really is the feeling that one gets
from walking around within St. Peter's Basilica
and the area around the Vatican.
There is such a feeling of hope, of renewal,
of a look towards the future for the Roman Catholic Church.
